Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
we are going to be talking
about a lady called Liz Truss.
If you had been taking a break
from the news between September
and October, you might not have
any idea who this person was.
She was, for a brief moment,
the British Prime Minister.
On September the 6th of 2022, she
walked through the door of 10 Downing
Street, becoming Prime Minister.
But on October 20th, just 44 days later,
she announced her resignation, and
with it she became the shortest-serving
Prime Minister in British history.
So, in this episode we are going to
look at how it started, what actually
happened in these tumultuous 44 days, and
ask ourselves where it all went wrong.
Ok then, let’s get right into it.
I was born in 1987.
When I was growing up, British
politicians for me were serious,
old men with grey hair and glasses.
If you can picture a man called
John Major, who was Prime Minister
from 1990 until 1997, this is the
vision of a British politician that
people of my generation grew up with.
And British politics was
boring and uninteresting.
Obviously, as a three-year-old,
I wasn’t following it closely,
but it certainly seemed boring.
Sure, there was infighting, backstabbing,
and crises of different sorts, but it
all pales in comparison with the British
politics of 30 years later, with the
magazine The Economist publishing a front
cover with the title Welcome to Britaly.
There is no offence intended, of
course, to any Italian listeners
here, but rather to point out that
the consistency and dullness of
British politics has long gone, and
the events of September and early
October 2022 resembled something more
out of a Netflix drama than real life.
So, where did it all go wrong?
First, we must look at how Liz Truss
became Prime Minister in the first place.
Then, we’ll look at her disastrous time
in office, what went wrong and why, and
now that this chaos is behind us, we
can reflect on what the future holds.
Ok then, so, how did Liz
Truss become Prime Minister?
There was no general election,
the British public didn’t vote for
her, so what was she doing in 10
Downing Street in the first place?
Well, first I must explain a
quirk, an unusual aspect, of
the British political system.
In the United Kingdom, people vote
for their local members of parliament.
These members of parliament, or MPs,
normally belong to a political party.
This political party elects its
leader, and the leader of the
political party with the most votes
typically becomes Prime Minister.
Importantly, we don’t directly vote
for a Prime Minister, it’s different
to the US system, for example.
Now, why am I telling you this?
It’s important because if a Prime
Minister resigns when their party
is still in power, there is no legal
need for there to be another election.
A new Prime Minister is elected by the
party in power, first the MPs vote,
and if the MPs can’t reach a conclusive
judgement, it goes to a vote among the
people who are members of that party.
And this is exactly the situation that
the UK found itself in on July the 7th of
2022 when Boris Johnson announced that he
was going to resign as UK Prime Minister.
Long story short, Boris Johnson’s
tenure as Prime Minister was mired in
controversy, from lying and cheating to
his mishandling of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The final nail in the coffin came when it
was revealed that he knew that a senior
politician had been accused of sexual
misconduct and not only did he ignore the
accusations and give him a job, but he
then lied about it when asked directly.
Even for a man dubbed “Teflon
Boris”, because nothing would
stick to him, this was too much.
He announced his resignation, and
this was then followed by an almost
two-month campaign to choose the next
prime minister of the party in power,
the Conservative Party, and therefore
the next British Prime Minister.
There were eight different
candidates for the job, and the
Conservative party was split.
The early frontrunner was a man
called Rishi Sunak, who had been
the Chancellor of the Exchequer,
essentially the Minister of Finance.
But he was seen by many allies of
Boris Johnson to have betrayed Johnson,
and he was also seen by many members
of the public to be too confident in
the fact that the job would be his.
Without getting too caught up in
the details of British politics, the
Conservative party has a wide range
of beliefs, from people like Sunak who
are closer to the centre, right through
to people on the very far right wing.
One such person was a then
46-year-old lady called Liz Truss.
She was a key ally of Boris Johnson, and
had been his Foreign Secretary since 2021.
After many weeks of political campaigning,
practically the whole summer, only two
candidates were left in the running to
become the leader of the Conservative
party: Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss.
Because neither candidate could
get sufficient support from MPs,
there was a vote by members of the
Conservative party, the 150,000 or
so people who pay membership fees to
be part of the Conservative party.
These people were predominantly older,
white people living outside major
cities, living in the countryside
in the south of the country.
To be precise, over half were aged
over 60, 97% were white, and they were
overwhelmingly based in Southern England.
And it was this group of 150,000 that
voted for the next leader of the party,
and therefore the next Prime Minister.
So on September 6th, after a tediously
long campaign, Liz Truss was announced
as the winner, beating Sunak with
57.4% of the vote to his 42.6%.
Why am I going into such detail here?
Well, the point to reiterate is
that an absolutely tiny percentage
of the country voted for Liz Truss.
Less than a hundred thousand people
out of a voting population of almost
50 million, it’s less than 0.2%.
And her leadership campaign
had deeply divided the already
divided Conservative party.
So, when she walked through the door of
10 Downing Street, the home of the British
Prime Minister, on September 6th, she
was doing so with minimal public support
and as the leader of a divided party.
It was always going to
be an uphill battle.
So, what actually happened?
Well, this story only lasts 44 days,
but they were certainly eventful.
Liz Truss went to meet the Queen, as
is customary for a new Prime Minister.
Within 48 hours the queen was dead.
Clearly, I’m not blaming Liz Truss,
but it wasn’t an ominous start.
And while Liz Truss can’t be faulted
for the death of a 96-year-old woman,
the rest of her demise was almost
entirely self-inflicted, it was
unnecessary and it was her fault.
So, where to begin.
Well, it all started to go wrong
on September the 23rd, as she was
only in her third week in the role.
Her Chancellor of the Exchequer
and close ally, Kwasi Kwarteng,
announced a “mini budget”.
Traditionally in British
politics, a Chancellor announces
a new budget in the spring.
But Liz Truss and Kwasi Kwarteng
decided to announce a new “mini budget”
almost as soon as they were in power.
It was, in theory, in reaction to the
energy and cost-of-living crisis that
was plaguing the UK, and was intended
to provide a blueprint for their
vision of the stagnant British economy.
Kwasi Kwarteng stood up in
Parliament and made his announcement.
He announced a series of tax cuts,
especially for the highest earners,
those earning over £150,000 a year.
These tax cuts would cost
the country £45 billion.
The idea behind it, which was a
key part of his and Liz Truss’s
philosophy about how to stimulate the
British economy, was that by reducing
taxes and government interference.
the size of the state essentially,
the country would become more
attractive to business, and in
turn the economy would grow.
This wasn’t some great secret that
he and Liz Truss had kept, and they
“surprised” the country by announcing it.
The pair of them had literally written a
book on exactly this back in 2012 called
“Britannia Unchained”, which set out their
vision for a low-tax British economy.
And Truss had talked extensively
about this during her
campaign to be party leader.
Now was Truss and Kwarteng’s time
to test out their plan, to finally
unchain the UK from the shackles
of high taxes and low productivity.
Unfortunately, it did not go as planned.
The financial markets did not react in
the way that Kwarteng and Truss had hoped.
The value of the British pound
dropped immediately after the budget
announcement, reaching an all-time
record low against the US dollar.
The cost of borrowing skyrocketed,
people in the UK trying to get mortgages
suddenly found that the interest
rates had doubled or tripled and their
dream house was now out of reach.
The Bank of England was forced
to intervene and buy £65
billion in government bonds.
Now, this isn’t a show about business
or finance, so we aren’t going to
go into the exact details, but the
point is that this announcement was
very poorly received by the world of
business and it ended up costing the
country literally billions of pounds.
And Liz Truss saw her popularity
ratings go the way of the British
pound, this already unpopular Prime
Minister became public enemy number one.
She was pressured to reverse the
announcement, or at least asked to
set out a plan for how these massive
tax cuts were going to be paid for.
Yet she did not, instead promising to
continue with her plan, not apologising
or accepting in the slightest that she
bore some responsibility for the chaos.
She did make one concession, which was to
sack her close ally and Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Kwasi Kwarteng, which she did
on the 14th of October, after it became
clear that she needed to do something.
He was replaced by a more moderate
politician, a man called Jeremy
Hunt, who quickly reversed
some of the major tax cuts that
Kwarteng and Truss had called for.
By now, there were plenty of people
calling for Liz Truss to go and
newspaper articles with headlines
like “What is the point of Liz Truss?”
Her entire political philosophy was one
of low taxes and shrinking the state, and
if she had completely reversed, gone back
on this policy, what was the point of her
being Prime Minister in the first place?
One British tabloid newspaper, called
The Daily Star, even set up a live video
feed with a picture of Liz Truss next to
a real lettuce, asking its readers the
question of who would last longer, the
lettuce or the British Prime Minister.
This was on October 14th.
Unfortunately, the next week would
get even worse for Liz Truss.
She was doing absolutely terribly in
opinion polls, with a dismal 9% of the
country thinking that she was doing a good
job, and predicting that if there was an
election tomorrow, the Conservatives would
lose the vast majority of their seats.
It was crisis time.
Although she was incredibly unpopular,
the rules of the Conservative Party mean
that nobody can challenge a leader for
12 months after a leadership contest.
So what happened was a growing number of
Conservative MPs started to voice their
lack of confidence in her, both formally
and informally, on and off the record.
And at the same time the Labour
party started putting pressure on the
Conservative government to call a general
election, an election that Labour was
almost guaranteed to win if Truss was
still leader of the Conservatives.
If things had been bad for Truss
after the crashing of the pound
and the loss of her closest ally,
things were about to get much worse.
And there were two real
nails in the coffin.
Firstly, on October the 19th her Home
Secretary was forced to resign after
being found to have used a personal
email for government business, and in her
resignation letter - which was made public
- she was highly critical of Liz Truss.
Then later that day there was a chaotic
vote on whether to ban fracking, the
mining technique, with some Conservative
MPs being accused of being bullied
into voting with the government.
For many Conservative
MPs, enough was enough.
Here’s a short clip of an interview
with a senior MP called Charles
Walker where he explains the mood.
/
This whole affair is inexcusable.
It, it is just, it is pitiful
reflection on the conservative
parliamentary party at every level.
This is absolute disgrace.
As a tory MP of 17 years who's
never been a minister who's got on
with it loyally most of the time.
I think it's a shambles and a disgrace.
I think it is utterly appalling.
I'm, I'm livid, and I really shouldn't
say this, but I hope all those people
that put Liz Truss in number 10.
I hope it was worth it.
I hope it was worth it for
the ministry or red box.
I hope it was worth it to sit around the
cabinet table because the damage they
have done to our party is extraordinary.
Enough was enough.
The following day, just 44 days
after she had taken the job, and
with record-breaking levels of
unpopularity and absolutely no way
out, Liz Truss announced that she
would resign as British Prime Minister.
She was, indeed, beaten by the lettuce.
There were calls for a general election
by the Labour Party, with critics pointing
out that the Conservatives needed to
give the British people the chance
to choose their next Prime Minister.
The choice didn’t go to the
British people, and the leadership
contest was thankfully much
shorter than the one in the summer.
It took just four days, and Rishi
Sunak received enough votes from
MPs to be elected party leader,
and therefore Prime Minister.
To date, at least, Sunak’s tenure as
Prime Minister has been refreshingly
boring and uneventful compared
to the chaos of his predecessor.
He has unwound many of Truss’s pledges,
although he is the leader of a deeply
divided and still deeply unpopular party.
And his challenge is two-fold.
Firstly, and this is of course the
primary challenge, to deal with the
many crises plaguing the United Kingdom,
from less avoidable crises such as
the energy and cost-of-living crisis
through to the completely self-inflicted
crisis of reversing the economic damage
of Liz Truss’s 44 days in charge.
But secondly, his job is to
rebuild some of the public trust
in the Conservative party that was
completely destroyed by Liz Truss.
The Conservative party’s core message to
the British public has been for a long
time that it is fiscally responsible,
that it is the party that knows how to
manage public spending and the economy,
yet Liz Truss’s 44 days in office  have
done what many commentators have said
to be irreparable damage to this.
Fortunately for the Conservatives, the
resignation of Liz Truss gave them an
immediate bump in the polls, with Rishi
Sunak seen as a more moderate and more
competent candidate than his predecessor.
Sunak has until January of 2025 to
call a general election, he has two
years to rebuild trust and patch up
the damage from the most chaotic period
of recent British political history.
It’s a monumental task that he has ahead
of him, and all that remains to be said
is let’s check in again in a couple of
years and see whether he manages it.
OK then, that is it for today's episode
on Liz Truss, the 44-Day Prime Minister.
I imagine that you might have been
aware of some of the chaos that took
place when she was Prime Minister,
but I hope that this has shed some
light on it, and provided a bit of
explanation about what exactly went wrong.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
How was this news covered in your country?
How has this changed your
perception of British politicians,
or of the UK as a country?
Do you think that Rishi Sunak will manage
to undo the damage caused by Liz Truss?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.